Last month's question was:Did you update your current install, or do a fresh install?

== Why did you upgrade instead of a fresh install? ==

to mantain apps and users

It keeps all my installed programs and files

Didn't want to risk losing any of my data and/or settings as I have in the past

Retains my preferred setup, plus previous upgrades have always failed so keep trying. 

Fresh 11.10 install doesn't work on my laptop.

I want to see if this time upgrade works for me

Wanted to know how it would go, if it had failed, a fresh install would always have been an option. Went perfectly, of course, as this ZaReason laptop was made for Linux

== If you did a fresh install, why did you not upgrade? ==

Ubuntu upgrades always cause problems. Its easier to start fresh and move files back in from an external drive. Have to keep good notes of the tweaks though.

Keeps the system faster, and it’s cleaner old style!

Less clutter, less contradicting config files

I never upgrade OSs

To avoid unexpected bugs and errors.

I have heard the horror stories how things go wrong after upgrading. A fresh install seems to be the easy way to avoid all problems.

I love a clean fresh setup. I have a separate /home partition, so I can always install fresh.

It takes about 20 minutes to do a fresh install vs. 2 hours for an update

Trust issues - it failed miserably in the past

Upgrade takes longer & does not always work.

To avoid problems of different software versions and to get rid of clutter. Past experience has proved to me that a fresh install is most trouble-free option.

found Ubuntu Remix and Gnome3!

== If you're not upgrading, why not? ==

Still on 10.10, happy there. Waiting for Unity to mature in 12.04

I do not like Unity, and I do not like the fact that I can't choose Gnome when upgrading or doing a fresh install. If I have to I will move to another distro to have Gnome.

Because of Unity, moved to Mint

No choice of desktop - switched to Debian Squeeze.

I don't like Unity or the direction Ubuntu is going. I've moved to Mint 10, but also looking at Mint Debian Edition. 

I stick with the LTS releases - less drama.

LTS installs only; I do change repositories to have latest, e.g., LibreOffice, Firefox, etc.

I finally have 11.04 configured the way I want it. I don't see that 11.10 offers enough for me to change.

Perfectly happy with Gnome 2, upgrading from 9.04 to 10.04 was a bad experience
