Quick, what is 20×3+5? If you can read this, and answer the previous question, you can thank a teacher. Did you use a calculator, or a specific set of eyeglasses, to solve the equation? The teacher taught you the mental process to it. From these basic building blocks, you learn increasingly complex concepts. It is not until you get to a university that you are limited to a certain set of tools to complete the task at hand, and sometimes due to a physical need (think of a microscope). Let’s look at two other equations:

The results for both equations are different. There is a mnemonic, PEMDAS, that reminds us that the order to solve an equation is: parenthesis, exponentials, multiplication, division, addition and subtraction. When I started college, my parents bought me an HP-42S because I needed a graphics calculator. It was an excellent calculator, but it did not work for me at first. The calculator was based on the Reverse Polish Notation (RPN) (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_Polish_notation), which I did not know at the time. It took me about an hour to get the hang of it. RPN is not the usual way we are taught in school. In RPN, the operators (mathematical operation) come after the all the operands (numbers) it will be applied to. Thus, the equations in RPN will be:
15 5 ÷ 7 + 20 3 ×
15 5 ÷ 20 3 × 7 +

In order to solve the equations, in the traditional or RPN way, you have to know how it is done. The tool that you use, traditional or RPN calculator, will give the same results. The important part is the mental process. Think for a minute how different things will be if we were only taught to punch numbers in a calculator, a specific calculator at that, and then have the calculator die on us. In the US, those of us that hold a bachelor's degree have to go through around 16 years of school. We are taught to use tools, yes, but mostly to think, to push ourselves to resolve problems in a creative way - so that the people around us and the next generation can do better. Back in the Greek empire, grown men were taught algebra. What they learned we now call pre-algebra, and teach it to seventh graders!

Once you have learned, you start using tools to improve your work. Scribes learned how to read, write, and do math. They were also employed to copy old texts. This copying was done by hand which was slow and painful. When Gutenberg introduced the printing press, the process of creating books changed forever. Today, we have word processors that make the process easier. And still, learning to write by hand is a required skill. Tools exist just to improve our basic skills.

As a kid, papers I had to turn over to the teachers were always done by hand. I would really like that this be a requisite up to sixth grade because it ingrains the syntax and grammar rules in our kids. My daughter has used computers to do school-work since fourth grade. One time, I looked at the screen and told her that several words were misspelled. Her answer was that I should not worry because the computer will fix them for her. I was astonished! She did not care about proper spelling because a “tool” could do it for her. Here was a prime example that learning was changing and not for the better.

Where does Ubuntu fall in all this? Ubuntu, like Windows, Android, OSX, iOS, and many others, is an environment for tools. They all offer their capabilities for those who use them. What Ubuntu offers that really differs in a meaningful way to school administrators is cost savings. I had a computer for nine years. That computer started as a Windows XP machine, and died with Ubuntu in it. That is nine years of not acquiring new hardware, and not paying (a lot) for software. The saved money can be used for capital improvements to the school - which endure for a long time, and benefit generations of students. 

For students, it offers tools that they can use at home without a huge cost and, in many instances, for free. It also offers a deterrent to (some) software piracy. It always blows my mind when a kid pirates 1GB of Adobe CS when they could freely download Kompozer, Scribus, Inkscape, and GIMP, and get the same results (meanwhile their parents do nothing about it). Getting used to a different set of tools also forces the student to learn the basics to be able to transport that knowledge to different tools.

Take, for example, web pages. Some schools offer courses in web page creation. These schools buy Dreamwaver, and go through the templates. They spend little time explaining what HTML and CSS are, and how they are integrated. You can always learn to use Dreamweaver or Expression Web, but, no matter what your tool is, the basics are the same. In Ubuntu, you may use Bluefish or Kompozer. With Bluefish you have to know your basics because there is no WYSIWYG interface. Kompozer has such an interface, and, once you know your basics, the WYSIWYG interface will help you a lot but not all the time.

Another tool to emphasize proper skills is Latex. Latex is all about writing and producing written documents. Latex philosophy is that the writer should worry about writing and the software worries about the presentation. Go to the repositories and try Lyx. You will notice that it is not your regular word processor. You cannot add meaningless space to separate words or paragraphs, or set capricious fonts throughout the document. As it says in their web page: “What you see, is what you mean.” You have to concentrate in just writing. Sections, paragraphs, syntax, lists, definitions, emphasis, and flow are your realm; presentation is Latex. A great tool for aspiring writers to really concentrate on their writing.

You will notice that I have not mentioned Edubuntu. That is because I have had mixed success with it. Edubuntu offers a broad set of tools to students. It offers pre-school to high school (and some more) software. The basic Edubuntu distribution is good as a starting point for people with mixed needs (think grades). If the population you will serve is uniform, you can download Ubuntu and just install the target school grades you need. Another thing to consider is that you may not want the software offered by Edubuntu, and a plain Ubuntu install will suffice.

One of Edubuntu strongest points is the use of iTALC (http://italc.sourceforge.net/) and LTSP (http://ltsp.org/). iTALC provides classroom management. With it, the teacher can see all the computers in the room, and provide remote help and tutorials. LTSP lets schools use less powerful computer hardware for the students, and moves the OS and computational needs to a powerful server. 

School administrators flock to Windows because that is what they are used to, because it is agency policy, because it is in their comfort zone. As personal trainers everywhere say: “You have to move out of your comfort zone to get results.” Andalucía, think of it as a state in Spain, in 2003, established a law to use free software. To that effect, in 2003, a Linux distribution was created to use in schools. The distribution is called Guadalinexedu (http://www.guadalinexedu.org/), a mixture of Ubuntu and Guadalinex (http://www.guadalinex.org/). It is in use in over 2,500 centers and 500,000 computers. For those of you that can read Spanish, check Andalucía's Board free software declaration at http://www.juntadeandalucia.es/organismos/economiainnovacionyciencia/temas/tic-telecomunicaciones/software-libre.html. 

For those who install Ed/Ubuntu in their schools, be aware of the use of codecs. As I said previously, Ubuntu does not provides the licenses to create mp3, mp4, wma, wmv, mpg, and so many others. You will have to obtain those licenses if you want to create content in those formats. That will not limit your capabilities. You can always encode to FLAC (lossless compressed audio), ogg Vorbis (lossy compressed audio), and ogg Theora (video), and, pretty soon, to Google's VP8/WebM.

I have had mixed success in my Ubuntu installations. Ten (a puny number, I know) of the installations, I have followed through the years. Some have had Ubuntu since 8.04. Just one installed a pirated Windows version. That one is in a church, and used for the youth in the community. Shame on them! Two have Edubuntu, used by kids in elementary and middle school. All say that they will not change their Ubuntu computers. The only bad thing is that they will not buy a new computer pre-installed with Ubuntu. I stay hopeful. 