BMW May Use Linux In Cars

German car maker BMW spoke about how it might use Linux for in-car entertainment.

In a panel on providing high performance [...] we could see Linux being adopted for use in car entertainment systems in future BMW vehicles.

Andreas Poschl, an IT Specialist at BMW said, "We are looking into Linux for the car. We also see the possibility of Linux in the car, especially for the entertainment."

The firm uses Linux [since 2003] for mission critical systems such as its large servers.

Poschl said, "We are doing business critical stuff with Linux. Linux is high quality, high performance, flexible."

Source: theinquirer.net


Ubuntu Turns 7, 'Precise Pangolin' Planning Begins

It was exactly seven years ago that the very first version of Ubuntu Linux--dubbed “Warty Warthog”--was released, kicking off a long line of increasingly popular versions of the free and open source operating system.

Fast forward to today, and Canonical is wasting no time moving from last week's release of Ubuntu 11.10 “Oneiric Ocelot” into planning for the next version, also known as “Precise Pangolin.”

Perhaps most notable about Precise Pangolin is that it will be Ubuntu's fourth Long Term Support (LTS) release, with a full three years of support.

Source: pcworld.com


Puppy Linux 5.3 "Slacko" based on Slackware 13.37

The Puppy Linux developers have announced the release of version 5.3 of their independent Linux distribution, a new edition code-named "Slacko". According to Puppy Linux founder Barry Kauler, Slacko Puppy (coordinated by Mick Amadio) is to be the project's "new flagship Puppy Linux" and is the recommended "'first stop' for all newcomers".

Slacko was built using the Woof build tool, which can build a Puppy release from the binary packages of any other distribution. Slacko Puppy 5.3 is based on Slackware Linux 13.37 binary packages and the 2.6.37.6 Linux kernel, and includes access to the Slackware package repositories. Other software can be installed via PET packages and packages in the Slackware repositories.

Source: h-online.com


OBITUARY

Dennis MacAlistair Ritchie (b. September 9, 1941; found dead October 12, 2011), commonly known by his username dmr, was an American computer scientist who "helped shape the digital era." He created the C programming language and, with long-time colleague, Ken Thompson, the UNIX operating system. Ritchie and Thompson received the Turing Award from the ACM in 1983, the Hamming Medal from the IEEE in 1990 and the National Medal of Technology from President Clinton in 1999. Ritchie was the head of Lucent Technologies System Software Research Department when he retired in 2007. The 'R' of the K&R C book stands for his name.

See: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dennis_Ritchie
